THE ANVIL OF VIRTUE
by Sean A. Garrison

Used with explicit permission of the author.
Sean A. Garrison is a personal friend of Rob Roach and a fellow member of a formal order of knighthood.
This text is a foundational reference for Rocky's Dream Engine — specifically Rocky Listening (Lobe 4).

Note on framing: Garrison writes from within a Christian chivalric tradition. For the purposes of Rocky's
Dream Engine, the theological framing is translated to secular humanism throughout. The obligations
Garrison frames as divine are understood here as obligations to the human covenant. There is no
supernatural authority — only the sacred trust that humanity holds for itself. Rocky knew this.
So, arguably, did Ramon Lull.

OCR extracted from physical copy scan, June 18, 2026.

---

8). from Scot]
£0 to Germany
did die
bro

Na fal] from H
Ught

Castle
UP In this Same

*My mot
PlOVince,

that |

friars to

---

On the
My own
Practices and o I have tried to

Writings of
ancestors and lastly I hav

Our
further observances based upon th

€ added some

€ tales told in

---

Oo “

r

ea ys and ha pre

mes of Wweapol

types nd it may also be the opinion of outlaws
_ a -

of honor.

4 yaries that all estates of soldiery are
mies ae is not so. Let those who do not fight
Ae tict ey will from their places of safety ang
corafort- those who bear arms and spend time in
harness are those who decide these things, and no
amount of laws, declarations or pronouncements
can change what is thought by those who have won
the most worship upon the field, although some of
this worship may have been snatched from other
men in the manner of false banditry- but this wi] be
discussed at length later in this book. This js as it is
God knows all.

> A ‘aaa ness carry the same level

e
Ss

I will tell you that I was brought into the
practice of arms by Sir Omarad the Wary, who at
the time was not yet a squire. | was not yet twenty,
but he was already in arms for two summers or
more when he did first give me helm and shield. |
tell you this because by the custom of arms since
Before the time of Alexander, a man who first gives
‘ou arms and teaches you the practice of knightly
veapons will rightfully expect om show :
oyalty from you, and it is a shameful thing to take

arms from a man and then turn away from his
guidance and counsel, and to not eare him
friendship and support if he desires to bring a troop
into battle under his direction, especially if he were
born to undertake such a noble task, as valiant Sir
Omarad was. This is as it is, and I give you these
words — if you would not be guided by a good man-
at-arms, than beware of taking arms, armor and
training from his hands, for you may do great
damage to your reputation if you say one thing and
then do another. Of course, you must weigh the

worthiness of those who would teach you and guide
you.

It is the way of things that all who labor
under arms in any Kingdom of the world are the

natural subject of a King, who has won his title and
lands through force of arms. Those who claim that

they are free people, living under the direction of no
King who lives may prove this to be so, but only
through hiding in the forests away from the
company of all good knights and valiant squires,
and by staying far from the fair fields where much

honor and renown is to be gained. These people

who claim that they are ruled by no King are
usually of little consequence, and most of them

---

You
‘S the ¢ © the R
oO o
mn. Be \ and SPeak Sh Pany ©f othe Tests.
defi; vary, of _  “Mefy) lies “S Who
ee “aing; aking Claj a Valian;
because the y, rk <rown Who we OR UNndyin
when “2 great Pr Of the Cro i = pie bina,
Tailin : King dies, his thera long, Since
= you did agai Son wil] rem Nee
not ais ASt h

himself a good
3 these things are’ only fo, the bands
of Kings to do. Remember this, if you w )
the rule of

Ould defy
Earls and Gre
are- for they are m
> and the arm of the King js |]

: Counts.

Lords of YOur land, bew

by the King
you are

at
aintained

a Squire or man-at-arms who f

eels great

Ong. So if

"’
j
-
- 4 - — 4
. ; 5 ne ‘ oe 4 7
: Pe et a a
$ xd es hie <9 4
’ . OF nds é * °
- ® tn
t é
%

id
4
|

i

:

:

a

. is >

Sep y King
and Ro... Mouth, | Stern},
}: ACE . 1 Ugh. ~ Ntre
dis} din ‘ SAtly Shy ; e
throy Sh

---

Who “re the Great
have Lreat household. “nd they fieig
Many SOldiers and archers. They May be
~Kingmakers> Who are also skilleg IN poli
they May have prog

Y Princes throu
Support and Suidance, pry that
alone in the army ofa King,

gh their
Man who Walks

who Wears his own

< a.
sf * ~
. - +
e , bP me Q

7
+t “ot
x 4 .
Ne “Sey be ~

ms. An arche
nd Soldier With
and a leather ©8P upon his head
arms, and | m

aintain th
nen-at-arms are very

IS not a Man-at-arms, a
Only a dagger. <
IS not a man-at-
and Ways of +

at the Culture

diffe rent than

9

---

it is Oft
POints ne

holds

land.
Knight Who
but ©Ngage
Coc. and exer
the Practice of - The man Who builds
Slege engines

Stles and
S Or bolts in battle m

ay
y Idier, but is no

ta Mman-at-arms. and

10

. nf oe z
Did #7; ia pie Ail

aa a + ee ‘ A

elat. oo Lae ‘a

~ y

---

Worthies of the past t
Otherwise is Shameful.

---

A squire must not carry @ Pavise eee i
specifically ordered to do sii since this 1s the aire
slingers or archers. A valiant man pers no fe
behind a gigantic door. A worthy shield is one tha :
man can easily carry on horseback cor afoot. O
course, there is a wide variety of opinion across the
world concerning this issue, and some men-at-arms
use bucklers of incredible size. I say let them follow
their own souls, but know that the beauty “ your
fighting will suffer from carrying around a kitchen
door upon the arm. Of course, some people care not
for appearances- these people do not often look into
mirrors for fear of what they may see. It isjasiitis.

A good squire or man-at-arms should also
endeavor to become close with all of the men-at-
arms of his locality, and then to expand his
acquaintance to eventually include many of the
good men-at-arms and captains of the Kingdom. He
will be wise and learn to showwreverence and
respect'for’all of those who deserve his reverence.
and he should also learn patience for those times
that he is faced with a man who thinks he deserves
more praise and favor than he is entitled to. This is
hard for the younger men-at-arms to understand, a
every young warrior who is deeply in love with his

14

own face will consider himself the equal of amy
mighty Duke. These men who are amiss in their
thinking must be broken like young horses- with the

whip and the spurs. Their breaches of true courtesy

, instead of
eft to drift like a spider on the surface of the water.
A strong hand is needed for those who would be
forged upon the Anvil of Virtue. It is the custom for
some knights to never correct a squire or retainer,
but instead choose to submit to all of their
discourtesy in silence, hoping that eventually the
retainer will come to their senses, and learn that
they are greatly disliked by many. If a young squire
greatly desires the office of knighthood, he may
perhaps change for the better with time, but it does
not do service to the Kingdom to let animals slowly
figure out how to eat with their claws. If you are
such a-person, you deserve direction and correction
instead of lies, do you not? You should be wary of
those who spare the whip and the spurs, otherwise
you may grow to be one of those repulsive men-at-
arms who but bury their foul excess of Pride deep
within the folds of memorized phrases and false
pleasantries. When you come to truly know why the

strong and loyal wear the belt of white, you will

Submit and with time be forged into a worthy

15

---

Squires forget their st
Station, and

€. True, there is
the readiness to be C
something new, and washed cle
world.

recognition
of readiness- reated into

an of the sins of the

& Served by his
have been Made
ve become priest
hing.

hey Should ha
Or perhaps some Other t

S

17
16

---

|
|

So, if you are a squire or a man-at-arms, and
you serve a knight who asks little of you, I say to
you that you should do what you can for him
without him seeing you or knowing of your labors.

Serve his lady whenever the opportunity arises. In

fact, no squire worth his weight in salt should ever
let the lady of his knight sit in the sun without
striving to provide shade for her. Her glass must
always be filled. As for your own master, strive to
keep_all of his many weapons close at hand and in
good repair. Take all marks from his helmet. These
things can be done in those moments where your
knight is busy with other matters. As for his shield.
no matter how many times he may forget himself
and lay it face down, do not neglect to turn his
device back towards the sun. One day if you have

squires of your own you will understand and
appreciate this.

I tell you these things because no squire, no
matter how valiant and preaux, is the equal to the
least famous of belted knights.

andayknight -is\a)knight. If there were nothing

special about those called to the vocation of holy
knighthood, then why are knights bathed, dubbed,
given the accolade and decorated with the outward

18

signs of their exalted station? Any squire who
desires knighthood for himself should prove his
understanding of the gravity of the office of
knighthood by knowing, understanding and
declaring that knights are different than other
soldiers. By serving knights, and learning chivalry
at their hands, the squire can come to understan

that to be worthy is to understand what worthiness
is- then one will work hard to reach that place,
while praising worthiness in others who may escape
notice through their own natural and true humility. |
say these things because they need to be said, so
that no squire who feels himself complete and
flawless will fail in the duties of his office, and
thereby bring shame with him into his next one.
Squires, serve your knights! Practice chivalry, and
Strive to be worthy of the day when you are dubbed.
but know this- a squire you will remain until the
golden spurs are placed upon your heels. Do honor
to that which you strive for and long for by serving
your knight in the expected manner, consecrated by
many centuries of honor and tradition. Be a good

Squire so that one day you will be a deservin

g and
true knight.

19

---

You must
in feats Of arms

understand that those w

ho excel

have done many things that those

Who are Without much Prowess are Willing to do.
Many who have natural

ability will not do the work

i in arm.
necessary to become long in wind or Strong in

22

myn ee
il tes OAs! =
’ wage

a
—
-
—_
———S
~ amen
— fo
_-
*
*
b
to -
+ ‘tae, ®, s
‘th,
_

*
aa -
eee

It should be obyv
him to be tak
Chivalry

>.

---

squires and men-at-arms to really grasp, since many
good men-at-arms see the knights as great heroes,
sid some cannot envision themselves as part of
their number. This is a great shame, for it keeps
many in a state where they cannot advance in skill
at aie A strong arm is a strong arm, and all good
squires and men-at-arms should struggle to be
selfless while they pursue prowess and the skills
that will bring them the proper renown and fame to
be considered for the Order of Chivalry.

To be blunt- you must find great fighters to
emulate. Find those who are similar in size and
weight to you, and study the way they move. Ask
with courtesy and deference to examine their
weapons- how do they differ from yours? Do you
use a sword that is too heavy for your arm? Many
do. Is the handle of your mace too large for your
hand? These things must be examined. The fit of
your armor and helmet must be constantly
considered. Your harness must be comfortable, and
without comfort and ease of movement you will not
even approach the level of skill that you may be
capable of. All good knights went through years of
labor in the effort to find the proper gear. One year
in a proper helmet is worth five years in a poorly

24

made one. Of course, this does not mean that just
any type of armor is acceptable for those who
would seek to represent the holy Order of Chivalry.
Gentles who wear scraps of junk and pieces or
refuse do no honor to the vocation of arms, and do
not advance the cause of chivalry. Those who seek
to make excuses are acting as churls act. | say to
you that any type of noble harness can be made to
assist a man-at-arms, as opposed to slowing him-
mail, scale, splinted armors and plate can all be
used without any worry of hindrance if they are

made and fitted properly. Seek out quality and then
do the necessary training.

One must fight with great intensity and
focus, but without crossing the lines of courtesy.
This can be very, very tricky. It is essential that a
good squire seem pleasant, even during the most
intense and difficult types of combat. This is
because if you allow your anger to take over, it will
be said that you have a weakness of heart and a
disagreeable character. Knighthood maintains that a
strong man can endure the hardship of arms with
great happiness in his heart. Those

Who use inner anger to fuel their labor
find that many good men-

good squires
S will quickly
at-arms and knights will

2

---

be disturbed by this, and some may even speak ill of
it. There will be trepidation over your show of
temper and irritation, because a tournament is a
thing of noble pleasure, and some would even say
that war is also a place for good humor and constant
faith. It takes strength to refuse to yield to anger.

So, it is important that before a blow is
struck that you gather your spirit with a smile on
your face, and struggle to remain cheerful even if
your helmet is on. If you do not love the practice of
arms, Why are you engaging in jousting or tourney?
When you are actually fighting and striking blows-
feel as you need to feel, but after the passage is
over, drop your hot anger and try to be a pleasant
companion or opponent.

I would speak for a moment of those
diseased gentles that, because of their anger,
frustration, and ceaseless desire for attention and
glory, have become poisoned and through their
many follies have lost the ability to acknowledge
when they themselves have been fairly bested, and
have perhaps lost renown because of their deep
illness of heart. These men are very rare, but the

26

worst among them are famous for their actions and
their families and blazons are well known.

These men-at-arms deceive themselves, for
they forget that their victory is awarded by those
whom they oppose. If they have proven to be of
such small and sickly spirit that they cannot bear to
admit when they have been bested, they simply
breed distrust and resentment in their opponents,
who in turn become infected with doubt and
distrust. In this way can a great tournament become
a gigantic Spectacle of Lies. This is a great shame.
There are so many schools of thought regarding
what is worthy and what is not, that often when two
groups of men-at-arms from different lands come
together to fight with arms of peace, they may as
well be screaming at each other in ten different
tongues. Nobody, for fear of diminishing his
chances of winning or doing dishonor to his lineage,
will easily admit that they have been beaten, and so
a friendly fight may change in spirit to one that is
flavored with hidden distrust or even hatred. I say
that when trust and the spirit of brotherhood and
pleasure is lost, then a tourney it is not, but it has
become another thing. A fight of hot blood and
anger where the Opponent is expected to freely

---

award the victory is an exercise in folly and blind
ignorance, for what man who still has strength to
strike will admit defeat and award a beloved prize
to a person he has grown to doubt and despise?

So I say to you that you should endeavor to
know your common opponents, and learn who
among the men-at-arms of the world are liars, and
thieves of good men’s honor. These men you must
fight with no poison of anger, and you are not
obligated to hate them, because God and all of the
people who watch them know them to be false men-
at-arms who will only bristle with Pride and, if you
point them out for what they are, they will just deny
it all like men taken with pestilence who claim that
they are well and whole. God knows all, and in their
sleep they are haunted by doubts and ugly Devils. If
a man tries to hand you the bucket of filth, turn
away and let: him carry it instead. Vainglory is a
disease to be feared.

Very few who take up the practice of arms
have any fear of injury or death; so fear should not
be a thing that a good man-at-arms has within his
heart when fighting in the lists with arms of peace,
but alas fear is still there- fear of defeat or disgrace.

28

ae ala

Those who would try to instill fear within their
opponents with outward signs, through the use of
ridiculous and fantastic armors and the like- these
people are not to be feared in the least, for most of
them consider themselves to be much more
dangerous than they are, while the Law of Arms
decide the limits and scope of our deeds. What
really creates fear within a combatant is the thought
that they may be facing an opponent who wishes to
win to such a degree that their ability to tell the
truth to themselves —and others- has been lost.
These people are“indeed to be considered carefully,
because they can very easily infect you with their
foolish beliefs and delusions and make you believe
ridiculous lies, and cause you to do great damage to
your reputation. Regardless of what these creatures
may say, there are no tyranits, barbarians or savages
among us, for surely if there were they would have
no need or desire to follow the rules of the lists.
Think on this. I advise you to strike all you face as
best you can, but think twice when a villain strikes
you, because you may be tempted to deny him and
thus become a villain yourself.

Since a vast majority of the men-at-arms of
the world are good and true souls, you can trust

---

i a ace nla Nees iad a ti te ee a el

them and enjoy the great largesse of spirit that they
will show you. This spirit of largesse and courtesy,
when you encounter it, should not go unpraised, so
you must learn to not be shy when it comes to
praising those who have dealt fairly and honestly
with you, or who have performed great deeds of
arms upon you in the field or in the lists. Bring gifts
for those who do great honor to chivalry, and do not
hesitate to give kind words to the consorts of valiant
and worthy men. If you meet a worthy man-at-arms
who is errant and fighting far from his home, and he
proves to be a valiant man of great worship, do not
hesitate to send letters praising his deeds to his
homeland, for such a deed will bring fame and
happiness to his lineage and his family. Such an
action will also bring great honor to your own
lineage, and increase the renown of your homeland
as well. Since it is the duty of all good men-at-arms
to bring honor to those they serve, this is an easy
way to do a good deed that will bring great riches in

return.

So you must struggle to fight with great
prowess and largesse of spirit, in order to prove to
the knights of the world that you deserve to be
numbered among them. Part of this involves

30

performing great feats while under the eyes of the
famous and worthy, but it also involves performing
good service that only God can see. This means
fighting when you are tired, giving your best when
uninspired, striking with skill so that no man may
need to question you, and serving as a soldier in wid
argument that the King may have with any whe
Prince or Lord who may oppose him. This means
leaving your home and traveling long distances
when your King desires your help. This means
doing whatever work is necessary to make sure that
you can be relied on by the great lords of your
homeland, as they try to do good service in the
name of the Crown and the populace. You must
show up and always be seen within the ranks. and
using the weapons that will allow you to do the best
service. This means bringing archers and siege
engines to the field if you are inclined to do so. This
means following orders, and refraining from
interfering with those who have been given
command. Many squires shout commands that are
of little use, so that they can show themselves to be
leaders of men and yet they often only show
themselves to be thorns in the side of — who
. Sadat and who are best
gainst the forces of the

31

---

opposing side. This does not mean that a good
squire should not shout encouragement, or repeat

the commands of his superiors, but few are the men
that have any business moving troops around the
field in plain battle.

It is important to show proper reverence
while in the field, but in the proper tone, so ignorant
men will not think that you are a sycophant who
seeks after awards and favors. Those men-at-arms
who speak to their commanders in tones of
disrespectful familiarity do themselves and their
companions a great dishonor, for even if a man act
as if he is not offended, deep inside he may be
injured by the absence of the respect he deserves.
Those who speak to the landed nobility and Royal
Peers without any signs of respect are even more
deserving of correction and punishment, for they
forget the Golden Rule. Think this way- what if you
were a man of great rank who gained this exalted
status through great labors, sacrifices and countless
days of hard service under the sun? Think of the
blows given and received that have brought a man
to a place of great honor and distinction! Would you
be offended by a squire or a man-at-arms who gave
no notice of such sacrifices, who believed as an

32

ignorant child believes that such great rank and
Ne station can be purchased through gifts or favors?
ae Only those ignorant of the true life of arms can say
) this, for although it seems that many unworthy men
have been raised on high and many worthy men
have gone unheralded, it is most often the case that
me 8 man’s true worth is unknown to the populace, and
a Be some who think that they have served well have
% served very little in comparison to those whom they
__ slander.

It may come to pass that a king may make a
_ knight against the will of the Order of Chivalry, but
is a very rare thing that such a man is totally
Be iideserving of elevation. More often it happens that

: a
. a man may change for the worse after he is made

_ ght. and then those who he has offended will say
- that he was always thus. If a man is knighted by a
‘i King. that King finds him worthy, and it is his right
q to knight those whom he pleases to elevate. The
poody of the Order will decide for themselves
pevnether it was a proper thing, but it is almost
aot eard of that a man who has been made knight to

have had no support of any substance within the
| a der. There will always be a few men who would

ave not seen a thing done, a law passed, or some

BY

33

---

other such thing. What is certain is that a knight is
made, and whether he is a true and worthy knight
inside is to be decided by many factors and the
opinions of countless persons, before, during and
after his career in arms. Renown and reputation are
forged, but anyone can be elevated from one Estate
into another- by the whim of the King. So be
concerned with your own worthiness first, and
understand that you are more worthy than some and
less worthy than others, but the King has his rights,
and to dispute them or haggle over them is time

wasted.

So as a squire you must make deeds of arms,
and the presentation of excellence in all knightly
exercises and labors, your prime concerns. This will
mean that you must seek out those situations where
the pressure is greatest, for this is the center of the
forge, and the glow and heat are illuminating as
well. In these places where the ladies watch closely,
and at those tournaments of great reputation where
only those greatest knights are among the last
standing- these are the places where your mind must
not be allowed to wander, and where your resolve to
win worship must not falter under small setbacks.
Concentration is of the utmost importance, and if

34

such pressures are not pleasurable to you, then
perhaps the Order of Chivalry is not for you to
embrace. This does not mean that you cannot lead a
Ge worthy life, for all deeds of arms are worthy, as the
fe knights of the past tell us clearly.

a So this brings me to those who will, by the
poets turn of Fortune’s wheel, remain squires for the
i ae entire time that they are in the life of arms. I sav to
eyes you that there is no shame in this, for the estate =
rank of Esquire is a noble and worthy one. A squire,
eR who no longer truly serves a knight in any capacity,
Be and who may lead a troop of his own, should —in
ae my opinion- be called Esquire, to do honor to the
a long service that he has given. Some are made into
og Sergeants, and some are given other honors and
: % titles- even given placés in the high command. In
; : i time of our ancestors it was a common thing for
i ee worthy men-at-arms to even refuse
x Smghthood, because of the expense and
( responsibilities that come with that high station, and
DP ésttistaiea acter
ia Del incase 1s to be given praise.
ae is the brightest light and
Bee. S one find the way to that worthy place?

*

On :
s € must seek after Knightly burdens and the

35

---

experiences that forge, and this means physical
sufferings, great joys, tribulations of spirit, learning
the limits of one’s powers, as well as learning to
accept that some are more gifted in performing
deeds of arms than others. It may be that a man of
average ability can come, in time, to be known as a
fighter of great skill and prowess, but the lesson that
some seem to perform wonders and do great feats of
arms with very little effort can be a painful and
frustrating one to learn. Only God can decide who
receives the greatest gifts of strength and skill, and
all those who labor in the waters where many deeds
of arms are decided through strength of spirit must
do so while being thankful for what gifts they do
possess, while fighting the urge to resent and hate
those who seemingly were given more than their
fair share. The truth of the matter is that all good
men-at-arms, regardless of natural ability, have
worked to improve their skills. Concentrate on what
you can do, and give praise where it is deserved.

To stand champion to a King, Queen or
Baron is the utmost honor one can obtain, but many
do nothing with this great chance to win renown
and worship. They shy away from challenging other
champions, or from doing types of fighting where

| prizes and trinkets are not to be gained. Since most
ae men-at-arms are champions of some consort. this
means that great undertakings and emprises are
there for those bold enough to try to stage them and
follow them to their conclusions. To require that
your opponents send word to your consort, giving
praise for your deeds done in their name, this
requires not only the boldness and courtesy to
properly request it, but also the skill to win the right
to make such a request. The difference between a
true knight and a regular man-at-arms is that a true
_ knight should have no fear of such undertakings and
a _ knightly emprises, but instead will seek them out
u es with great happiness. Knight-errantry and
i, _ adventures of this sort are not in conflict with the
practice of true and loyal soldiering, as many would
have you believe. Those who would have you
7 - believe such things are afraid of taking on
a i _ adventures and speaking knightly vows, for fear that
Pac ae they may be seen as elitist, and out of touch with the
common soldiery. Let those who fear such

3 the ways of true chivalry:  soldiering,
adventuring, uments passages of arms, formal

37

---

deeds of arms should be well known to those

squires who seek to become true knights. A squire
must seek after deeds of arms, adventures and
things of that nature, and not be afraid to make a
vow or take on a valiant quest.

Next I would turn again to behavior in the
tournament lists that is becoming and ed gs to
those who would seek to become belted knights.
Make every effort to seem meek, Eoue and
courteous, and at the same time fight with great
ferocity and purpose. Do not strike with more force
than is appropriate to friendly deeds of im but
make sure that your blows will be Se and
remembered. Accept any blow that gives you a
pause for reflection, but when you are sure that a
blow is insufficient, you may stand for your own
without any fear of shame. Do not cae a
tournament in a state of shameful disarray, with a
shield without blazon and with the shoes of a
peasant upon your feet. Make sure you are
presentable, but make sure that you do not ne os
absolute perfection in your array, either, for this will
cause you to be distracted from your first Sel es
fighting well and with strength, élan ane knightly
grace. Strive for the highest excellence in chivalric

presentation, but seek not after perfection. for to do
so will only give you anxiety and needless worry.
Make sure that your weapons are in good repair, so
that they will not detract from the spirit of nobility
and true chivalry that those who sponsor a
tournament work so hard to create.

Do not salute your opponents in a way that
will seem pretentious, or overly aggressive and
ridiculous, but strive to reflect strength and honor
while being courteous as well. If the consort of your
opponent is nearby and known to you, do not fail to

_ offer a bow or a nod, because to forget to do such a

thing will simply be a wasted opportunity to forge
good bonds of friendship and respect between noble
households. Call those of greater rank by their
proper titles, and if you cross swords with a Prince
or King, do not fail to request permission to strike at
their royal persons before doing so. Those who do
not see the wisdom in this practice are fools, for to
do otherwise is to show disrespect for the Royal
Family, all of those who have in the past held that
noble seat of power, as well as those who would

as _ Tepresent the land in the future.

---

It is a good and noble thing to defeat those
without prowess without apology or concern, seo to
strive to injure those without true pO is a
shameful thing, so take into consideration the
person inside the helmet. There are many ladies of
small frame within the lists and es the field of
battle, and although they can smite with Joes skill,
and can be as dangerous as any, it is still iat ugly
thing to beat them down or run them over a a
regard for their safety. Although they can bruise,
batter and dent armor, they are still ladies, and eum
a man is the size of a mountain he should refrain
from crushing those ladies that have sea os
practice of arms. Take these things acs
consideration, and consider my words deeply. Th
about the many types of men-at-arms that may be in
the lists and in the field, and think about pes who
are worthy of chastisement, but also Scnsides those
men-at-arms who are not even worth doing — of
arms upon. Fear shame. If you are a ae squire, |
also have words for your ears, SO listen close to

to you.
am pees your reputation at all costs, for the
spiteful world still wishes for woman to np Sie
place. In my opinion you must beware 0

knights who would seek your company and fealty

for reasons other than the fellowship of war. That
road leads to Infamy. Many jealous men-at-arms
will think that you seek to purchase skills and rank
through other, unknightly labors. I do not tel] you
these things because I wish to make you fear what
may happen, but because I know with great
certainty what will happen, because I have heard
shameful tales repeated countless times, and have
seen many good ladies held back in the career of
arms through the infamy that rises from these
situations. Strive to be what a knight must be. and
remember that the world seeks after such tales with
an unquenchable desire. People speak lies because
other people love to believe them, but they love to
believe —and repeat- the truth even more, and if you
seek fame and a knightly reputation like any other
good man-at-arms, you must face the fact that there
is no equality in these matters, nor will there likely
ever be, so you must be extra vigilant and watchful.

I refuse to lie to you- many knights and squires

_ carry on in all types of ways, and people look away

and pretend these shameful situations are not
happening, or else they say. that they are of little
Consequence, but the same behavior is often
Considered a great shame and disgrace when done
bya lady squire, and because this state of unfairness

ESO PS NY BER

---

exists, true vigilance is needed by those ladies who
would earn renown and knightly fame.

I would now turn to chivalrous conduct on
the field of battle, whether that battle is a noble
Grand Melee. or else a war or siege game where
archers, crossbowmen and siege engines may be
present. What it is called and the particulars are of

little matter, but there are good practices that a
squire can use to increase his renown when in the

field, so that he can bring honor to his Kingdom, his
knight, his lady and himself.

To take advantage of the situation that the

battle-games present is to not lose any chance to

increase your fame and advance your reputation
among the various Kingdoms of the world. Since
most of the soldiers who muster for these contests
have traveled a great distance to come to fight, it is
a good and proper thing to endeavor to make them
remember you, for a kni ghtly reputation that crosses
many borders is a reputation to be cherished. To
gain honor, you should open your heart and do the
nor, and this can be done in many diverse

afraid to forge bonds of trust and
s with whom

enemy ho
ways. Do not be
friendship with those good men-at-arm

you have shared great exchanges in the fj

this can be great exchanges of blows fee
exchanges of knightly talk. Look iiaea me ae
ie ranks of the enemy for that man-at-arms ia hee
“se ( eppesonifies the knightly ideal, and strive to se we
a * ‘ him out after the fighting is done. You can “a

b. | i him with kind words, or rich gifts that will elit
be: aos heart. Better yet, present a gift to his Bae

since the consort maintains and inspires the warrio
This practice does honor to knighthood

+

at:

This practice of presenting gifts to enemy

ie y good men-at-arms treat this situati
they had been tak i ester
i €n prisoner, since changes in
. a : a often —in the days of our ancestors-
. and the need to pay a ransom to th
4 W ;
. 0 had conquered us by skill or by luck
you have been struck by a man of weit
o ou

you have had a chance to strike a single

blow, the
a n you should approach that man after the

---

tell you MY Own heart, and you cq
to see what Standards
my household.

and you Can take
them, but I hope that you wi

nu
I have Set for

Stands against you, that the way

makes him your brother and comrade-in-arms, and
that you should treat him courteously, both when
you conquer him and if he conquers you. To do
otherwise is churlish, and even those who conquer
most should seek after meekness and humility.

Of knighthood

44

ee [ will
h gift as

y and give her a ric

| Ido this because Chivalry demands it

a

45

‘SS i's GAA Ea AA Ft RE

---

I will never pay a ransom to a man who
fights among the mercenaries, or who fights within
lances or units that have earned hatred and infamy,
for although a worthy and true man may be found in
those ranks, they dirty themselves through the
fellowship that they keep, and this is because all
men-at-arms know when their fellowship inspires
hatred, loathing and disgust among the noble
peoples of the world. Those who would choose
infamy over a good reputation cannot be trusted,
because the image they keep within their mind’s eye
of themselves has more worth to them than the
reputation that they carry in reality, and in the
minds of others. They forever stare directly at this
mirror of the mind, instead of looking elsewhere for
measurement and judgment. This means that they
cannot possibly fear God, or the opinion of those
who restrain their true manhood and play the games
of joust, tourney or battle in the spirit of friendship
and respect. For this reason I will refuse to award
praise and gifts to those who seek after infamy on
the field.
Returning to mercenaries- I must not give

them praise and favor because many of them fight
atural Lord, and such

against the interests of their n
Taking

actions give me nothing but sickness.

46

payment for the service of soldiering is not
ih because if a good man-at-arms finds sie -
in a far-away land, it is a good and noble thin ,
him to be paid in some way to fight for those iat
he does not know very well. What I take issue with
is that many mercenaries fight against their own
oe countrymen, and even against those who have
_ taught them the use of arms- this is a shameful
_ thing. To stand against those who have taught you

‘a

_ the use of arms, advi

a oa : , ised you on matters of policy
and in i

a g, and tried to help you guide your way
_ towards honorable victories is a crime against

Bee dship fee courtesy. These people are for sale,
and there is a name for creatures who sell what

ae

ce . : .
ens give out of love and passion.
ban

be aN ,

ne I will pay no ransom or give no gifts of
a os to any archer, for they are not men-at-arms
: at my business and comradeship is with the sei
: ms of the world. While an archer may be a
a byal’ person, a wise person, and a reliable friend
a pare not men-at-arms, and what they do is

ee Te 7. s

47

24 :
Saree

ag i 4
»f Pie }

Cg DP RLIITT TT EE eee ae

---

Let me now turn to the other talents that a
good squire must have to be considered worthy of
the great mantle of knighthood, since service in the
feld is but one of the many abilities and virtues that
are looked for in the acolytes who struggle to win
the golden spurs. Of course, prowess in the field
and in the lists is the primary business of knights
and all good men-at-arms, but the Arts of Peace
cannot be ignored, because without the appreciation
of the works and labors of the other Estates there
can be no sense of duty to the populace. Those
good squires and other men-at-arms who have no
snterest in the labors, pursuits and passions of those
gentles who do not bear arms and study the art of
war are not fit to be raised into the Order of
Chivalry, because a true knight must love and
respect those who he has been charged by God to

represent and protect.

Those who hate and despise the commons
and the artisans are not, and can never be, true
knights. This does not mean that a true man-at-arms
must endure insult and derision by cowards and
those who know nothing of the workings of
Kingdoms and nations. Courtesy is the behavior of

the civilized court, and indeed the entire world ;

not 3 feasting revel where only soft words ean ,
a essing are acceptable. A good Squire should not ‘is
q afraid to lt his mind and defend the right, but he
p must do it in a noble and rational manner, and not
let his words be tainted by any lack of humility. A
good squire must understand and appreciate ‘hee

?

Jabors and sufferings of the other classes so that he

ee
may fight for them and defend their rights with

is is: . e'.6
greater simplicity and ease, and learn to see beyond

the — °

<a urface of eae that he can love his fellow
ay en- a

peaiym of them, not just those who bear

arms, fight in tournaments and purchase the ale or

>

Since art enriches the soul, a good squire
h at Ae. eae . e

ene familiarity with the world of the arts
id attain a high degree of accomplishment in some

) fh eS
Aa

c perereative skill. The world is filled with many

os e di . . x . .

Eo ana poetry, painting, the decorative
sa uilding of furniture and tents; a good
Ire must

: a ea to become an accomplished

. » se at he will beautify the world in some

AV ar) 1 '

'y other than in the wearing of noble arm

azon. Many fight ewe
ln ers of great renown will never

ome belted knigh
Ee } an . t
ghts because of the low opinion

t

---

that they have of the arts and gentle sciences. In the
days of my youth it was understood that squires
were expected to tend fires, serve and carve at table,
and be able to sing or recite if they were called upon
to do so. Dancing was not unknown to the squires in
those days, and it is a sign of the times that those
who seek only after prowess are heard to speak
hard, mocking words against those who dance and
revel among those who do not bear arms and seek
after honor in the field. Those squires who will only
break bread and drink wine with other warriors
bring shame to themselves, because they turn their

backs on the commons and the artisans.

I did serve at table, and I did dance Pavanes.
I tended candles at feasts and I poured wine at many
4 meal for the ladies. This was many, many years
ago when I was first a squire, but I must say that
these days I see very few of the most worthy squires
doing any of these labors. They fight in
tournaments, and then they return to camp and revel
with their closest comrades- disdaining the
company of any but their closest brothers-in-arms.
Why do these men, who seek with all their hearts to
wear the golden spurs, feel that they should never
have to learn these gentle arts, and perform the

50

One /

sone weiiin that my good knight did perform? H
did these things, and I strived to learn these thin e
gs

a and perform these labors myself. The truth of th
a” . . ©
__ matter is that in the days when Chivalry was new

“§ AY ‘
g en

[and who
__were called knights knew many, many things that
are never taught today, and many who think they
_ deserve Knighthood have never sought these things
_ out, because now only those who would be widely
known as thugs and bullies are thought worthy to be
_ made knights. This means that Knighthood may
| pass only to the robbers and the unlettered dirt of
the camp. and this is a great shame, for all that is
worthy and beautiful in the world must be

;
ity,
ST Oe Ray te

epeantained and shored up against the waves of
° Be enorance and vile stupidity. Squires- seek after
aon _ those skills that will make you a gentleman. Any

oul beggar can learn to swing a sword- strive to be

=

more, and strive to uphold all that belongs to the

s

Pe eee For those who have. strived to. learn
“ah ae and all that pertains to the society of
7 gentlemen, I would remind you
Z ee 2 not neglect the development of

ts Knightly skill. If you have no Prowess,

51

ine? ran ee wg: ate
di Me PF ARERa 17s? Water.

---

a knight you can never be, for skill at arms, strength
of body and endurance of wind are the bedrock
upon knighthood was_ built. Strive to conquer
without lying. Strive to astonish with your strokes
and with your defense. Strive to bring the mightiest
low with your power and your skill. Never be
ashamed to lose, and never buy a victory with a
long story. Those who come to the lists to talk and
negotiate over every blow do not deceive me. Be
generous with your compliments, knowing that in
the days of the true knights even the most valiant of
Preudomes were watched by judges and doubted by
the opposing side. As many a good knight is heard
to say- renown is like the brightest gold, and every
action makes you richer or poorer in the eyes of the
world. Protect your reputation, and seek after
perfection, . knowing that knightly perfection is
impossible to attain. Look for opportunities to do
gallantry, but never neglect true vassalage when on
the quest for knightly fame. Serve your betters.
May God bless and keep every good squire
who reads this book, and may the Archangel
Michael lead the best of you to the holy cleansing
bath where true vassals come to be touched with the
branch of Holly. I pray that the Lord Jesu Christ
guide well the steps of your chargers, and that the

52

TT /,

Holy Virgin watch

Over your every step taken i
_ battle or in duel. Pray for he who has wr; :
im ritt
_ book, so that God and his Angels ———
‘an . ; nary choose to
guide me into Paradise after a long life behind the

“

lance and the shield. Knighthood was not easy for
me to attain, since I was born under the signs of
anger and strife, and many years I wasted searching
a after Honor in the wrong way, turning my face
away from service and from the Truth. In this book
— el have hoped to save you some of the pains that |
Bs did suffer while I walked alone in the dark wood.
_ Follow the voice of Honor that calls to you- become
i a true vassal, and struggle to remain an honest man.
5 ___ Serve Knighthood with all of your strength.

I, Vitus Von Atzinger, knight strenuous

| main the servant of the fairest lady living in any
Christian land, and those who say otherwise may
seek me out at their leisure. God keep you all.

23